---
layout: post
title: "Cloud Different"
subtitle: "Less reliable, more expensive? Sign me up!"
header-img: "img/mon-maui.jpg"
author: "David Dooling"
tags: [big data, genomics, IoT, precision farming]
---

Over the past several years, cloud computing of all types has gained a lot of
momentum. Because of the massive increase in mobile computing, more and more
people are consuming cloud services like GMail, DropBox, Instagram, and
Office365. These Software as a Service (SaaS) solutions are convenient for
people on the go because the information they need is always easily accessible
through a web browser or mobile app. This is possible because the user's data
and preferences are stored "in the cloud", using servers and services managed
by someone else, typically the operator of the SaaS solution. While these SaaS
solutions are convenient for end users, they do not allow for much
customization. To develop custom capabilities in the cloud, you must turn to
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

IaaS consists of virtualized compute, storage, and networking managed by
someone else that you can consume, typically on a pay per use basis. The
automation enabled by consuming infrastructure via services allows you to spin
up an entire data-center-like environment in less than ten minutes! Many IaaS
providers like Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud Platform
provide additional capabilities like managed message queues, notifications, and
even databases delivered as a service. Using these building blocks of IT, you
can rapidly create solutions for your customers without purchasing a single
piece of hardware.

So what's the catch? While self-service infrastructure and paying only for what
you use sounds great, typically cloud infrastructure is less reliable and over
time becomes more expensive than on-site resources. To reap the benefits of
IaaS, you must think differently about your solution architecture. If you
don't, you'll end up with a less reliable, more expensive solution.

![Cloud different](/img/cloud-different.jpg)

When architecting solutions in the cloud, you must design with the following
five principles in mind. First, you must automate every aspect of your
infrastructure and solution, ensuring your solution can be spun up reliably,
rapidly, and repeatably. Second, since cloud infrastructure is less reliable,
you must create solutions that are fault tolerant, responding to and recovering
from failures automatically. Third, your solution must be horizontally scalable
so it can scale up to meet demand and scale back down to control costs. Fourth,
you must secure every aspect of your solution environment. Security is your
job, not someone else's! Finally, you have to use commodity, cost-effective
components so that executing on the first four principles does not break the
bank. Done properly, cloud solutions can be more reliable and less costly.

Clearly, continuing to use the technology and processes that have been
optimized for internal operations is not going to lead to success in the cloud.
When we asked ourselves how Monsanto could be successful in the cloud, we knew
our people would have to adopt new technologies and develop more agile
processes. The effort to define these technologies, create these processes, and
enable our workforce to successfully adopt them both is our Third Generation
Application IT work stream, or 3GA. As part of the 3GA effort, we have deployed
solutions adhering to the above principles to Amazon Web Services, our
preferred IaaS provider. The patterns we have established on projects like Seed
Returns will be applied to more projects over the coming months.

You can learn more about the cloud and how Monsanto is using it by reviewing
the slides from the Cloud Tech Talk. For a quicker introduction, view the video
or read through the slides from the April Excite Talks.

The cloud presents an amazing opportunity for Monsanto to increase the speed
with which we can deliver capabilities to our customers, both internal and
external. To capitalize on this opportunity, we must embrace the cloud's
architectural principles so we can deliver solutions that delight our users.
